Student Conference Abstract

There are many applications for image segmentation in the world of
medical imaging; for example, feature identification and
classification, 3D visualisation, and volume estimation. All these
help when working with CAT scans and each require knowledge of where
key anatomical features are found in the image.

In order to locate any such features, the image needs to be
segmented. That is, pixels of similar greyscale values get grouped
together in the same region. Most algorithms tend to over-segment
images significantly, leading to far more regions than can be handled
sensibly. This effect is partly due to problems such as indistinct
boundaries between features and the variation present between
different images, and partly due to the algorithms not having any
knowledge of the context in which the segmentation takes place.

Figure 1 illustrates (on a CAT scan) the results of a common
segmentation algorithm, the watershed. The image is clearly
over-segmented and not much more useful than the original for the
purposes mentioned earlier.

The over-segmented image can be processed further by grouping together
those regions that feature similar grey values. This technique is
known as the waterfall algorithm. It yields a hierarchy called a
partition forest, which is a more comprehensive data structure that
can be used subsequently in the process of feature identification. The
waterfall algorithm is widely used and can produce good results.

Figure 2 illustrates the various layers that result from applying the
waterfall algorithm repeatedly to the segmentation shown in Figure 1.

[some generalities about how waterfall works]

I present a new data structure for the waterfall algorithm that
simplifies the process and improves efficiency compared to current
implementations. It is based on a recursive-tree data structure and a
recursive relation on the nodes rather than the conventional iterative
transformations.

[some details about the new data structure]

Production of partition forests has many applications outside of the
field of medical imaging, for instance, binary space partitioning in
3D map rendering for games.

[some results, and possibly something about validation]
